Retrospectives
==============

Retrospectives are one of the best ways to improve the way a team works.
They're one of the most important Agile practices.

A retrospective is a time set aside to reflect on how the project has been
going, and how things could be improved in the future. Specifically, what
changes can be made by the team itself in order to work better?

The team should discuss mainly the processes they use to get work done.
These are the most ripe for improvement. Many coaches don't recommend
talking about technical topics at a retrospective, but if there's a
technical issue that the team needs to make a decision about, or if
there's a technical means of making improvements, then those should be
fair game for discussion at a retrospective. When in doubt, ask "will this
discussion help us improve the way we work?".

A lot of process issues have to do with the way team members work
together. Working in close quarters for long periods of time under
stressful conditions can lead to lots of tension. These tensions can play
out between team members. In some ways, a retrospective can be like group
therapy or marriage counseling. This is a good thing; working out those
issues will lead to a more cohesive and productive team.


Timing
------

Retrospectives are often held at the end of an [iteration]. However, this
does not need to be strictly the case. Many teams prefer weekly
retrospective meetings, even if the iterations are longer.

It's important to have regularly scheduled retrospective meeting times.
Self-improvement isn't something to do on occasion. It's something to do
as often as we can afford to. One hour a week is 2.5% of our work time.
There's a good chance that the improvements suggested during the meeting
will more than make up for that time.

But not every retrospective needs to be held at a scheduled time. If
there's a process issue that needs immediate attention, then an impromptu
retrospective meeting might be the best way to work through and resolve
the issue.

TOOD: Sidebar story about impromptu retro with T1D team.


Facilitation
------------

If at all possible, get someone from outside the team to facilitate the
retrospectives. This should be someone the team can trust. A team lead
from another team would be a good facilitator, especially if the other
team is also implementing Agile practices.

Ideally, the facilitator should *facilitate* the meeting, and not
necessarily try to control the meeting. The team often will go where it
needs to go, with just a little push in the right direction. The
facilitator should try to keep things on track though, so that people
don't go off on tangents that aren't addressing the issues at hand.

Another role the facilitator needs to play is referee. Make sure that
people aren't placing blame for things that went wrong. The team should
always be focused on how to improve; looking to place blame is not
helpful in moving forward. One way to keep from placing blame is to
realize that given the same situation, resources, and knowledge at the
time, you would probably have made the same decisions. Placing blame on
individuals will just cause them to stop being open and honest, and the
pace of improvement will slow down.


Who Should Attend
-----------------

Everyone on the core team should attend. This should include all
developers on the team. Designers and QA testers should probably be
included as well. Unless the issues always tend to be developer-oriented,
the other team members will often have ideas to contribute.

Opinions are mixed on whether managers should be a part of the team
retrospective. If the manager is engaged day-to-day with the team, and
there's trust between the manager and the other team members, then the
manager should be a part of the retrospective. If that's not the case,
then it might be difficult for people to be open and honest if the manager
is present. It's very important that people feel comfortable speaking
their mind during the retrospective.


Activities
----------

When facilitating a retrospective, you'll often need a way to drive the
conversation. Sometimes the team will have topics that they would like to
discuss. But often, the facilitator will need to come up with a way to
get people to talk, and direct them to important topics. These are done
though various retrospective activities or exercises. (Many Agile
practitioners call these games, but we prefer use a more serious term.)

There are many activities that can be done during a retrospective. The
canonical reference is the book [Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams
Great], by Esther Derby and Diana Larsen. Anyone facilitating a
retrospective should read that book, then use it as a reference.

Some short activities are good to do at every retrospective meeting. One
of our favorites is the "temperature reading", where everyone rates their
current happiness with respect to the project and the team. This is then
used to plot whether the team members think things are getting better or
worse.

Other activities take longer, and should be scheduled for a specific
purpose. Generally this is to find out what's on people's minds, but it
might be more specific, such as getting to the root of a particular
problem that the team is facing.

The typical longer activity involves asking 3 simple questions:

* What are we doing that is working well?
* What should we stop doing?
* What should we start doing. 

The idea behind most of these activities is to drive discussion. At the
end of the discussion, the team should decide on some action items. These
action items are small changes that the team can make to try to improve.


Suggested Starting Point
------------------------

* Start out with regularly scheduled retrospective meetings every other
week.

* Start with 1 hour retrospective meetings.

* Get an outside facilitator if possible.

* Start out without any managers or project managers involved. The
facilitator should ask the team on occasion if they think they would like
to invite the manager.

* Start with 2 basic exercises:
  * Team happiness temperature
  * Start, stop, continue

* Make adjustments as necessary.


Resources
---------

* [Agile Retrospective Resource Wiki]
* [Tasty Cupcakes]: TODO
* TODO: More resources.



[iteration]: TODO: Reference the chapter on Iterations.
[Agile Retrospective Resource Wiki]: http://retrospectivewiki.org/

[Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams Great]: http://pragprog.com/book/dlret/agile-retrospectives
